# AlphaFold

DeepMind's talk: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uQ1uVbrIv-Q

(incomplete) slides: http://predictioncenter.org/casp13/doc/presentations/Pred_CASP13-Structure-AlphaFold-Jumper.pdf

## Protein folding (3D) structure

- primary (sequence of amino acids) -> secondary (local folding) -> 3D (long range folding)

    - primary: peptide bond

    - secondary: primarily hydrogen bond.
    Alpha helix - hydrogen bonds between backbone oxygen and hydrogen atoms.
    Beta sheet is formed of beta strands, and stabilized by hydrogen bonds between the beta strands.


- sequence -> 3D structure?

    - Experimental technique: X-ray crystallography, NMR spectrometry


    - Computational: Sequence implies structure, therefore in principle we can predict the structure from the sequence alone.

        <!--Difficult to accurately model the Physics. [img]-->

        <!--Naive experiment: Given a small protein (100aa) assume 3 possible conformations/peptide bond,-->
        <!--3^100 = 5 × 10^47 conformations.-->
        <!--Fastest motions 10- 15 sec so sampling all conformations would take 5 × 10^32 sec.-->
        <!--Sampling all conformations will take 1.6 × 10^25 years.-->


        ab initio: Use just first principles: energy, geometry, and kinematics

        Homology: Find the best match to a database of sequences with known 3D-structure

    - Rosetta: http://depts.washington.edu/bakerpg/papers/Bonneau-ARBBS-v30-p173.pdf

        - Monte Carlo based method

        - Limit conformational search space by using sequence—structure motif I-Sites library (http://isites.bio.rpi.edu/Isites/)

            - 261 patterns in library

            - Certain positions in motif favor certain residues

        - Remove all sequences with <25% identity

        - Find structures of the 25 nearest sequence neighbors of each 9-mer

        - Rationale

            - Local structures often fold independently of full protein

            - Can predict large areas of protein by matching sequence to I-Sites

        - New structures generated by swapping compatible fragments

        - Accepted structures are clustered based on energy and structural size

        - Best cluster is one with the greatest number of conformations within 4-Å rms deviation structure of the center

        - Representative structures taken from each of the best five clusters and returned to the user as predictions

    - CASP

    [img]



<!--## Data-->

<!--PDB-->

<!--UniClust-->


## Model

workflow [img]


## Residue distance & torsion angel


- input: sequence + MSA (multiple-sequence alignment) (more details in their SI methods)

- output: backbone torsion angels + pairwise distance distribution between residues (64 bins)

- training data: PDB + MSA from UniClust30, cropped to 64x64 regions

- model: 2D dilated CNN, 220 residual blocks, see extended Fig 1 & SI methods


## protein potential

- input: torsion angels (+distances)?

- output: potential

- take gradient to find torsion angels that minimize the potential.


## reference model

No sequence input.

<!--3 NNs?-->

<!--1. VAE to generate fragments-->

<!--2. distance + torsion angels-->

<!--3.-->


<!--## Performance-->

## Their contribution

- Predicting distance between residues > predicting contact

- potential + gradient



